---
layout: post
title: "Mysticism"
categories: resources
tags: [documentation,sample]
image: sufi.jpeg
---
<span style="font-size:0.95em;">Ibn Rushd generally approached mysticism with scepticism. He believed that true knowledge of God could be attained through reason and rational inquiry rather than mystical experiences. Ibn Rushd emphasised the importance of philosophy and intellect in understanding the nature of God and the universe. He saw mysticism as potentially leading to subjective experiences that might not align with rational truths (Ben Ahmed and Pasnau). In Ibn Rushd's critique of Al-Ghazali's mystical inclinations, "The Incoherence of the Incoherence," (which I think is such a funny name in response to Al-Ghazali) he points out Ghazali's reliance on mysticism, “Certitude is reached, [Al-Ghazali] says, not through scholastic reasoning, not through philosophy, but through mystical illumination and the mystical way of life. [...] It is generally believed that the Tahafut, the book in which he criticises Philosophy, was written in the period of his doubts. [...] But we should not look for consistency in Ghazali; necessarily his mysticism comes into conflict with his dogmatism and he himself has been strongly influenced by the philosophers, especially by Avicenna, and in many works he comes very near to the Neoplatonic theories which he criticises” (Averroës). (Please see the section ‘Today…what can we learn?’ for an analysis of the parts I leave out in this quote.) Ibn Rushd suggests there are conflicts between Ghazali's mysticism and his religious doctrine, and claims that Al-Ghazali's book, “The Incoherence of Philosophers” was written during a period of a personal crisis in faith. Ibn Rushd suggests that Ghazali's mystical inclinations, while influential, were not grounded in the rational inquiry that he advocates for. Ibn Rushd did not view mysticism as something grounded in intellectual inquiry.
<br>
<br>
Al-Ghazali was a mystic, and is often credited with reviving Sufism (Islamic mysticism) in his time. He wrote extensively on spirituality and mystical experiences, and he placed a significant emphasis on the importance of mystical experiences and inner spiritual journeys as a means of attaining closeness to God. Al-Ghazali’s work “The Revival of the Religious Sciences” is considered a cornerstone in the development of Islamic mysticism, as he discusses many aspects of Sufism and the ‘inner dimensions’ of the Sufi faith (Faruki). Al-Ghazali believed that while reason was important, true knowledge of God and spiritual fulfilment could only be attained through direct personal experience and inner transformation, central to Sufi practices (Hasan). Al-Ghazali's personal journey, seen in his autobiographical work "Deliverance from Error," shows his embrace of mysticism as a transformative experience leading to spiritual enlightenment, he says, “Sufism has no secrets into which I have not penetrated; the devout adorer of Deity has revealed to me the aim of his austerities; the atheist has not been able to conceal from me the real reason of his unbelief. The thirst for knowledge was innate in me from an early age; it was like a second nature implanted by God, without any will on my part” (Al-Ghazali). His mystical exploration served as a cornerstone of his theological framework, and he believed in the importance of inner spiritual awakening over purely intellectual pursuits. Through his mystical inquiries, Al-Ghazali sought to reconcile his philosophical inquiries and religious doctrines with his spiritual experiences (which Ibn Rushd points out, “necessarily [...] comes into conflict with his dogmatism”...see Personal Bias). Al-Ghazali's emphasis on the primacy of mystical experiences in attaining spiritual fulfillment over purely intellectual pursuits is a reflection of his beliefs in the limitations and sources of human knowledge, shaping his approach to sociopolitical issues by advocating for a more spiritually informed view of the world.</span>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
