---
layout: post
title: "On the sources and limits of human knowledge (intro)"
author: ""
categories: documentation
tags: [documentation,sample]
image: introp.jpeg
---
<u>IBN RUSHD </u>
<br>
<span style="font-size:0.95em;"> Ibn Rushd believed in the compatibility of reason and revelation in the pursuit of knowledge. In his book,  “On the Harmony of Religion and Philosophy” Ibn Rushd argues that studying and reflecting on the creation as signs of the Creator is not only allowed, but also encouraged by religious law. He cites verses from the Quran that urge believers to reflect on the natural world as evidence of God's creation, he says in his book, “<span style="font-size:0.1em;"> </span>'Reflect, you have vision:' this is textual authority for the obligation to use intellectual reasoning, or a combination of intellectual and legal reasoning” (Averroës). By showing that pursuing knowledge through observing the physical world, scientific, and philosophical means, is not only compatible with Islamic theology, but is rooted in them, Ibn Rushd emphasises the necessity of rational discourse and inquiry. He says that, “Since it has now been established that the Law has rendered obligatory the study of beings by the intellect, and reflection on them [...] therefore we are under an obligation to carry on our study of beings by intellectual reasoning.” This shows how Ibn Rushd saw the value of scientific inquiry.
<span style="line-height: 0.1;"><br>
<br></span> 
We can see this in practice in Ibn Rushd's view of creation. He argues that what is necessary for “common” people to know, will be revealed in a way that is easy to understand, and that because of this, the Law must have used examples of the creation of things in the tangible world (Averroës). His point becomes more clear as we go further in depth on his argument that creation points to the existence of God. Ibn Rushd points to how elements and features of the earth intricately work together and compliment one another—how all the animals and the plants and of the earth are fit for the habitation of a man, and other animals living in it, how the water is fit for sea animals, and how the air is fit for birds. (Averroës) Finishing his point in a ‘mic drop’ moment, Ibn Rushd says, “if there be anything amiss in this creation and edifice, the whole world would come to confusion and disorder, then [one] would come to know with certainty that it is not possible that this harmony in it […] be found by chance only.” We see how this is true in today’s climate crisis (“Scientists Deliver ‘Final Warning’ on Climate Crisis” ), and the fine-tuning of the universe (McRae). Ibn Rushd's argument that things are revealed through creation, and that creation is evidence for the existence of God underscores his belief in the harmony and purposefulness of the natural world. Ibn Rushd championed the compatibility of reason and religious revelation in the pursuit of knowledge. By aligning philosophical inquiry with religious teachings, Ibn Rushd lays the groundwork for both intellectual exploration and spiritual faith, which remains relevant for contemporary discussions on the relationship between religion, philosophy, and societal progress.
<span style="line-height: 0.1;"><br>
<br></span> 
<u>AL-GHAZALI </u>
<br>
Al-Ghazali had less trust in the nature and scope of human knowledge, and pointed to religious faith and revelation. However, he claims that knowledge is extremely important. In "The Book of Knowledge," Al-Ghazali discusses the intrinsic nature of excellence and its association with knowledge. In a metaphor, he compares knowledge to the excellence of a horse over a donkey, emphasising its inherent superiority—that while other attributes, such as swiftness in the case of a horse, may enhance its excellence, knowledge stands apart as an absolute excellence, describing it as the description of Allah's perfection (Al-Ghazali). He also says that knowledge is more excellent and noble than sought-after objects, as it leads to both worldly success and spiritual fulfilment (Al-Ghazali). (Forgive my bias in the following!) Despite his own engagement with philosophical inquiry, Al-Ghazali's critiques of the philosophers highlight a contradiction within his own thought. While he acknowledges the importance of intellectual pursuits and theological speculation, he simultaneously rejects certain aspects of the philosophical tradition, particularly when they conflict with his religious convictions. In his work "The Incoherence of the Philosophers," Al-Ghazali vehemently criticises the rationalist approaches of philosophers like Ibn Rushd, arguing that reliance on reason alone is insufficient for attaining ultimate truths about God and the universe. He critiques the philosophers' emphasis on metaphysical speculation and abstract reasoning, accusing them of leading people away from the true path of religious faith and revelation (Al-Ghazali). Al-Ghazali's rejection of certain philosophical principles reflects his belief in the supremacy of divine revelation as the ultimate source of knowledge, contrasting sharply with the rationalist perspectives of philosophers like Ibn Rushd. 
<span style="line-height: 0.1;"><br>
<br></span> 
In "The Book of Knowledge," Al-Ghazali explains the classification of knowledge into ‘praiseworthy’ and ‘blameworthy’ categories. He argues that while knowledge itself is not inherently blameworthy, it can be considered so if it leads to harm or if it is mostly harmful. Al-Ghazali provides examples such as magic and astrology, which, although they involve knowledge, are deemed blameworthy in Islamic teaching due to their potential for harm or their speculative nature (Al-Ghazali). He also critiques the excessive focus on legal opinions and contentious debates in jurisprudence, highlighting the neglect of spiritual and ethical dimensions of knowledge, quoting from the Quran,“‘Verily the (real) jurisprudent is he who forsaketh the world and seeketh the hereafter, who understandeth the import of his religion, persisteth in the worship of his Lord, is pious, restraineth himself from attacks on the reputation of his fellow Muslims, abstaineth from (reaching his hand to) their riches, and giveth them advice.’ In all of this, he did not say, ‘who knoweth all legal opinions.’” Al-Ghazali challenged the conventional view of jurisprudence (fiqh) as solely legal knowledge, emphasising its broader spiritual dimensions. He defined a true jurisprudence as one who prioritises spiritual pursuits and ethical conduct over worldly gains. Al-Ghazali's perspective on the sources and limits of human knowledge are founded on his religious belief in the nature of truth and the role of revelation in guiding human understanding. We will see later how this influences his broader socio-political beliefs.
<span style="line-height: 0.1;"><br>
<br></span> 
<u>SUMMARY </u>
<br>
Ibn Rushd and Al-Ghazali had different perspectives on the sources and limits of human knowledge, based on their philosophical and religious outlooks. Ibn Rushd, advocated for reason and empirical observation, which differed from Al-Ghazali, who prioritised divine revelation and mystical experience. Ibn Rushd believed in reason, and made efforts to reconcile philosophy with Islam. On the other hand, Al-Ghazali criticised Neoplatonic Islamic philosophy (Hasan), arguing that it contradicted Islam's central beliefs. Al-Ghazali fought for religious orthodoxy over philosophical speculation. These fundamental beliefs of Ibn Rushd and Al-Ghazali on the sources of knowledge are shown in their broader stances on cultural exchange, political governance, and mysticism. Their intellectual disagreements shed light on the complex intellectual landscape within the Abbasid era. </span>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>